---
layout: post
title:  "The Yubikey OTP Algorithm"
date:   2016-01-20 12:35 -0500
categories: abc
---

The yubikey is a fascinating device capable of generating passwords that
are only useful in the instant they are generated.
By the end of this post you should understand how passwords are generated,
encrypted, decrypted, parsed, and validated.

First steps
-----------

Before your yubikey can generate passwords, it must be set up to generate
valid keys. Specifically, this means it needs a public ID, a private ID,
and an AES128 key. The public ID is a 12 character modhex encoded string
(6 bytes).  Modhex is basically just hexadecimal, but instead of
0123456789abcdef, it uses cbdefghijklnrtuv. The creators of yubikey decided
to use this because it avoids keys that may not be found or work differently
on international keyboards. The private ID is a regular 12 character hexadecimal
string (6 bytes). The AES128 key is a 128 bit (16 byte) random number encoded
as a 32 character hexadecimal string. You can use the application provided
by yubikey to write these values to your key, and also to send them to
yubikey's hosted authentication service. This will be important later.

Generating the Password
-----------------------

Now that your key is capable of generating passwords and the yubico
auth service is capable of validating it, we can dive into how this algorithm
works. The first thing to do is use your key to generate an OTP like this one.

    vcbindnjbrglnjnkjrbeibifjunjrugctrltdilrrler

Note: I've created a yubikey just for the sake of this demo. I did not
send the info to yubico so it will not validate with their servers but you
are free to try :)

Decrypting the Password
-----------------------

The first thing the server does when it recieves your password is decrypt it
into a useable token using the AES key we sent it earlier. You may notice that
the first 12 characters of your generated token are always the same, they are
the 12 characters used as your public id. The server uses this public ID to
look up the AES key associated with your yubikey.  This key is then used to
decrypt the rest of the password into a 32 character (16 byte) hexadecimal
token.

```python
>>> # split the password into the 12 character id and the 32 character payload
>>> pubID, data = split_otp(vcbindnjbrglnjnkjrbeibifjunjrugctrltdilrrler)
('vcbindnjbrgl', 'njnkjrbeibifjunjrugctrltdilrrler')

>>> # convert the 32 character payload from modhex to hexadecimal
>>> data = modhex_to_hex(data)
'b8b98c1371748eb8ce50dcad27acca3c'

>>> # retreive the AES key associated with the ID from the database
>>> aesKey = get_key(pubID)
'8754cb76d94d74fb12987a9dc8c2b9fc'

>>> decrypted_key = aes_decrypt(aesKey, data)
'b7f5c2c4f8061000388837003206bf59'
```

At this point a simple CRC16 checksum is done on the decrypted token. The CRC16 must be
`0xf0b8` or the token is invalid. The reason for this is some magic based on
how CRC16 works and doing a checksum of a checksum. Someone more knowledgeable may be
able to explain why this is.

Parsing the Decrypted Token
---------------------------

The next thing the server must do is parse the decrypted token. This is a very simple
process and consists of splitting it up according to the following schema.

field|# chars|# bits|description
-----|-------|------|-----------
uid|12|192|The uid is the private ID for your yubikey
useCtr|4|64|The use counter is the number of sessions your yubikey has been used
tstp|6|96|The timestamp is randomly seeded when you plug in your yubikey, then increments at 8hz
sessionCtr|2|32|The number of times your yubikey has been triggered in the current session
rnd|4|64|A random value to increase entropy
crc|4|64|A crc16 checksum of the entire token

Validation
----------

Now that the validation server has decrypted and parsed the OTP it can validate
the password using a very simple process. After confirming that the uid is
correct, it simply makes sure, using the useCtr and sessionCtr, that this
password hasn't been used before. Each time you power on the Yubikey, the
useCtr is incremented inside the device, then on each button press the
sessionCtr is incremented inside the device. This means that if the useCtr has
incremented, then the server knows this is a new password regardless of the
sessionCtr. If it the same, it checks the sessionCtr to make sure it has
incremented. This means it is a new button press on the same power cycle
(button used more than once without unplugging the device. If neither has
incremented or the useCtr is lower than the last used key, the server knows
this is an old password and it should be rejected.

Usefulness
----------

It is important to understand what the Yubikey is and what it is not. It is not
a replacement for passwords. It is, however, a useful addition to them. With a
simple password authentication system, passwords can be stolen, guessed, or
known by attackers. If a Yubikey is used, commonly called a second factor of
authentication, the attacker would not only have to guess your password, but
would also have to steal your physical Yubikey. Conversely, if they stole your
Yubikey it would be useless without your password. The two authentication
methods work in concert to provide a stronger guarantee of authenticity than
either could alone.
